---
title: "20 TPPs"
date: "2024-11-16T12:00:00.000Z"
template: "post"
draft: True
slug: "/blog/20TPPs/"
category: "Life Sciences"
tags:
  - "Life sciences"
  - "Healthcare"
description: "please give feedback"
---

We've made major progress in treating disease, and over time these nascent indications are evolving into mature ones, saturated with therapies. __Therapeutic whitespace is shrinking fast.__ Where do you go as a drug developer once the low hanging fruit has been picked? Do you hide in academia? 

Chinese CEO scientists are building some of the most fearless new drug companies (see IL-25 in AD, CD3L1 and IGSF8 for cancer immunotherapy, believing in PD-1/VEGF before no one else). While this has seemingly worked beautifully for entrepreneurs in China, there is a fine line between fearless and stupid with high capital costs in the U.S.


Copy Sanofi in Immunology
Copy AZ in oncology

Long half life anything with a pulse
Dual payload ADCs
Biparatopic or bispecific ADCs to enhance internalization
Targeting transcription factors with novel chemistry
Protein removal therapeutics


UKBB found that APRIL is enriched in serum of people with osteoarthritis

EDA2R

UKBB proteomics web browser: https://proteome-phenome-atlas.com/ 

I'll give reasons for why you might do this or why someone likely hasn't done this yet.

Antibody engineering of Fc regions for ADCs to prevent non-specific internalization

ZED1227, a selective oral transglutaminase 2 inhibitor -> DEGRADER (Characterization of PROTACs for targeting tissue transglutaminase 2 (TG2) in cancer)

γ-chain antibody (CD132)

ANTI-PAPP-A ANTIBODIES


Degrade any receptor by conjugating PEI to the antibody [Nature Chem Bio](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41589-024-01803-1)

One really instructive (for me) exercise was going through lists of proteins that are secreted and detectable in serum. These should be targetable by antibodies and thus are already 'targetable', and are enriched for various hormones, cytokines, and other molecules that have a role in pathology. For example, there are several groups trying to make proteomic signatures of aging

IL-32 for liver disease

IL-20 family ligands in wound healing


suPAR antibody SC YTE (Walden Biosciences has one, WAL0921 but it is dosed IV)

CXCL13 neutralizing antibody for aging

[MIF antibody](https://www.cell.com/cell-metabolism/fulltext/S1550-4131(25)00018-X)

IL-11 neutralizing antibody

Combine multiple modalities against the same target. E.g. HER2 antibodies and small molecule inhibitors

RASopathies (Renal Arteriovenous Malformations)

Trametinib for [endometriosis](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10240146/)

Polymicrogyria -- associated with mutations in PTEN

ChatGPT summary of RASopathies


FGF18 drug depot

### Oncology

Extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma - nr4a3 inhibitor/degrader


SPP1 catalytic antibody or some extremely potent format. 
- Targeting intracellular SPP1 with PROTAC?

Receptor internalizing antibody for PD-L1

Better FAK inhibitor/degrader

FOSL1 degradation
- Drug resistant cells are dependent on FOSL1

CFLAR degrader
 - Recurrent CRISPR screening hit
 - CB-7587351 

SIK inhibitor for fibrolamellar carcinoma

Trispecific degrader of PI3K and KRAS. 
- KRAS induces cell stasis and requires inhibition of PI3K for apoptosis
- PI3K pathway activation is a resistance mechanism to RAS pathway inhibition

STAT3 degrader

Masked T cell engager

AKT degrader

### Immunology

CD122
IL-11
IRF5

Matchpoint
Hotspot
Kymera
Triana Biomedicines
Lifordi Immunotherapeutics
Terremoto
Forward Therapeutics

TSLPR biparatopic

[Biparatopic that mimics FGF21](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5912448/)

Diabetic foot ulcers


Non Th2 asthma or COPD

IgM cleaving enzyme for IgM related disorders such as cold agglutinin disease.
- small market size. 

TGFb for rheumatoid arthritis

Long half life IL-11

Long half life IL1RAP antibody for HS, to compete with IRAK4 inhibitors

Amyloid removal

### Neuroscience

Nav1.8 inhibition in cancer associated pain

SARM1

